beginning in 1967 requesting agencies
provided names of persons and
organizations some of whom were US
citizens to the National Security Agency
in an effort to obtain information which
was available in foreign communications
as a byproduct of our normal foreign
intelligence mission the purpose of the
lists vary but all possess a common
thread in which the National Security
Agency was requested to review
information available through our usual
intercept sources the initial purpose
was to help determine the existence of
foreign influence on specified
activities of interest to agencies of
the US government with emphasis then on
presidential protection and on civil
disturbances occurring throughout the
nation later because of other
developments such as widespread national
concern over such criminal activity as
drug trafficking and acts of terrorism
both domestic and international the
emphasis came to include these areas
for the first time officials of the NSA
revealed project minaret a program of
systematic eavesdropping on American
citizens in 1967 all 1973 general
lewallen told how communications were
monitored to spot the messages of 1600
american airline oh you had say years to
watch list of names supplied by the CIA
FBI Defense Intelligence the army the
secret service gives in the Bureau of
ellicott exceed dangerous objects sort
of an analyst we had a president one day
who would say to you you are instruct on
tributions made by the NSA to the
defense of our country messages between
Americans that are purely domestic is
there anything in the members of this
committee or to the staff 18 remit days
to say great care so it's not cannot do
this austere president of our excuse to
do it because it's illegal yes sir what
is what provision is there in the law I
understand interpretations that the
right to privacy unreasonable search and
seizure perfect well all of those those
domestic intercepts which cannot be
conducted under the president's
constitutional authority for Foreign
Intelligence then we are not authorized
by by law or a solution work however a
30 for him but those very Senate
Intelligence in the detail to probe
every deal will assume is a public
hearing the community with all the
provision has our practice camera yes
religion the monitor private cables
Senate approving united states and
foreign countries 40 NBC News Washington
description they would often give you or
how the information was used was largely
unknown to the NSA is that correct well
that it is certainly to some degree
correct sir there were the the points
you made were recognized at the time and
there were steps taken to try to to
protect against the dangers that you
that you point out for example there
there there was as a matter in practice
a description of of the Foreign
Intelligence requirement to which names
were were request yet they would say
this would be for drugs or this is for
personal security the President or this
is for the purpose of determining
whether there's foreign influence in
terms of the anti-war movement and so on
but there was no way that you really
knew was there not in most cases what
may have been behind a request or how
that information was being used well yes
sir that's an strict sense that's
earlier and thus similarly the IRS is in
the same position that if some agency
like the FBI in its Cohen tell program
is pursuing an illegal objective you may
be tasked to intercept messages in order
to procure information for an illegal
purpose and that too then ought to be
defined very carefully to protect your
agency from abuse would you agree with
that yes sir and I find that answer hurt
me during the watch list days
you were pressed heavily along with the
other agencies to find evidence of
foreign involvement direction or control
of the anti-war movement would you say
that you found much of any evidence of
such foreign control and direction sir
my understanding that is is not complete
from a review of the results of those
messages which we did provide to other
agencies they essentially did deal with
foreign influences and foreign support
to to certain domestic activities and so
in that sense I would say that the
results of the NSA activity did show for
an influence it is also my understanding
that when that information was put in
perspective by particularly to see how I
believe that their conclusion was that
the degree of foreign control was very
small the first part of your answer
surprised me a little bit because almost
uniformly we've heard evidence from the
various other agencies that they found
littler or foreign when you're tasked to
review saying as foreign involved agreed
that we could raise today we're leading
us and he wore activists and we know him
to be a moderate peaceful person matter
of fact someone who clicked the anti-war
movement even though it was desperately
against the war because he so much
opposed some of the militancy and
violent rhetoric sent a message to a
popular singer in a foreign country
asking for contribution to a peace
conference concert the message noted the
plant and also his participation the
message noted the plan participation
this concert of some of the most popular
musicians in groups in the u.s. at that
time and asked the recipient either to
participate directly in providing the
entertainment or to support the concert
financially now we've agreed not to use
the names
I don't know why we've agreed not to use
the name we have but ever the reason
being that we haven't first cleared it
with these individuals or there's a
matter of their own privacy that we have
to take into account all right kind but
in any event when you're picking up
stuff like this from peaceful people who
just are opposed to a current policy of
a war which now most Americans feel was
unwise do you not think that it raises
very serious questions about how you
contain snooping and spying on American
citizens when an agency is required to
pursue an objective which virtually
defies definition and can spill over so
easily in a way to undermine and
discourage political criticism and
dissent in this country I'm afraid sir I
have to dodge the basic philosophic
nature of your question because the
facts are that as has a technical
collection agency NSA was asked to a far
more simple question which is a little
hard for me to go back and construct all
the motion at the time certainly not the
same as today but that question question
was that the Defense Intelligence Agency
in this particular case asked bye-bye
for information on the funding of
certain us peace and anti-vietnam war
groups and this message was from such a
organization or a person to an overseas
location where foreign funding and
support was requested it is certainly
true that at this time in history one
would probably have a substantially
different view that then but it shows
how very difficult it is to define the
outer parameters of a search like that
does it not I mean if we knew if we
could use the names today I think people
would be a surprise that a governmental
concern or
the feeling that government had the
right to snoop and such messages would
they not well I I only can say I don't
how to answer your question the
requirement to us the request for
information was very specific and very
constrained and addressed to a very
narrow point the the broader aspect to
your question I think I'm not really
qualified did to answer well I think
that's why we have to define your
requirements to include some very
precise limits on the interruption of
citizens rights because one to ask that
question did get to rules that bear on
this committee that maybe some of our
members have forgotten about it's a
Senate rule 36 paragraph 5 it says
whenever by the request of the Senate or
any committee there of any documents or
papers shall be communicated to the
Senate by the President or the head of
any Department relating to any matter
pending in the Senate the proceedings in
regard to which our secret are
confidential under the rules said
documents and papers shall be considered
as confidential and shall not be
disclosed without the leave of the
senate I have wanted to make that a part
of the record in the event that any
classified information might be offered
by a members of this committee under the
assumption that we have the power to
downgrade or down classified classified
information then we in our own rules
under Senate resolution 21 as Select
Committee is required to protect
classified information section 7 reads
as follows the select committee shall
institute and carry out such rules and
procedures as it may deem necessary to
prevent to the disclosure outside the
Select Committee of any information
which would adversely affect the
intelligence activities of the Central
Intelligence Agency in foreign countries
or the intelligence activities in
foreign countries of any other
department or agency of the federal
government so you are
probably in your opinion of operating
outside the law I just wanted to set the
stage so that this committee would not
try to operate outside the rules of the
Senate and the rules of its own
committee I have no questions Thank You
senator I think it reply to the
suggestion that the committee is
operating outside of the rules of the
Senate or outside of the law I don't
believe that to be a correct statement
of the position of this committee but I
I won't interrupt the line of
questioning at this time because I think
senators would like to have a chance to
complete the question all of the witness
and I'll bring it outside the rules I
said we may barrel we will discuss that
had greater detail unless the Senate
would like expensive now I thought we'd
go through the line if I just want to
protect you and all of us profitez i
think is integral what i really i really
appreciate that let's say but Aaron I'm
very touched by seven go waters concern
for your seat let's see who that steer
better Baker as chairman thank you very
much in general I noticed in your
statement on page VI 6 on all matters
past or present relating to the NSA oh
that was terribly broad sir well it
seemed I'm Yvonne illustration took a
terribly broad position I believe it is
probably fair to say on all matters that
relate to the intelligence operations of
the National Security Agency yes sir
and it is also clear that although the
administration opposed these hearings
this morning on the watch list question
they did declassify the documents at the
committee's insistence and did authorize
you to appear as a witness this morning
to respond to the committee's questions
that's correct I've listened with great
interest to your your testimony general
and to the answers and it seems to me
that the real area of concern for this
committee has nothing to do with the
fact that on occasion your operation
watch list operation related to a
perfectly good and important matter
don't think anybody here would quarrel
about the fact that information
affecting the protection of the
president is a very important matter and
if you have a capacity to help in that
regard I don't suppose any member of
this committee would want to argue that
that is your relevant or unimportant the
same thing can be said about narcotics
we're all concerned about in archives so
our inquiry here hasn't as its purpose
criticizing given objectives that you
sought serve of the kind that you've
described but rather the
NSA does not know and with an exception
to be described has not in the past
conducted intercept operations for the
purpose of obtaining the communications
of US citizens however it necessarily
occurs that some circuits which are
known to carry foreign communications
necessary for foreign intelligence will
also carry personal communications
between US citizens one of them is at a
foreign location the interception of the
communications however in the overriding
interest of obtaining the maximum amount
of foreign intelligence
it
[Music]
yes hearing will please come to order
this morning the committee begins public
hearings on the National Security Agency
or as it is more commonly known the NSA
actually the agency remains unknown to
most Americans either by its acronym or
its full name in contrast to the CIA one
has to search far and wide to find
someone who was even heard of the NSA
this is peculiar because the National
Security Agency is an immense
installation in its task of collecting
intelligence by intercepting foreign
communications the NSA employs thousands
of people's of people and operates on an
enormous budget it's expansive computer
facilities comprise some of the most
complex and sophisticated electronic
machine machinery in the world just as
the NSA is one of the largest and least
known of the intelligence agencies it is
also the most reticent but it sweeps in
messages from around the world it gives
out precious little information about
itself even the legal basis for the
activities of NSA is different from that
of other intelligence agencies no
statute establishes the National
Security Agency or defines the
permissible scope of its
responsibilities rather executive
directives make up the sole charter for
the agency furthermore these directives
fail to define precisely what
constitutes the technical and
intelligence information which the NSA
is authorized to collect since its
establishment in 1952 as a part of the
Defense Department representatives of
the National Security Agency have never
appeared before the Senate in a public
hearing today we will bring the agency
from behind closed doors the committee
has elected to hold public hearings on
the NSA only after the most careful
consider a lot to imperil character we
have prepared ourselves
exhaustively we have circumscribed the
area of inquiry we we have a particular
obligation to examine the NSA in light
of its tremendous potential for abuse it
has the capacity to monitor the private
conversations of American citizens
without the use of a bug or attack the
interception of international
communication signals sent through the
air is the job of NSA and thanks to
modern technological developments it
does its job very well the danger lies
in the ability of the NSA to turn its
awesome technology against domestic
communications indeed as our hearings
into the Houston plan demonstrated a
previous administration and a former NSA
director favored using this potential
against certain US citizens for domestic
intelligence purposes while the Houston
plan was never fully put into effect our
investigation has revealed that the NSA
had in fact been intentionally
monitoring the overseas communication of
certain US citizens long before the
Houston plan was proposed and continued
to do so after it was revoked this
incident illustrates how the NSA could
be turned inward and used against our
own people it has been a difficult task
of this committee to find a way through
the tangled webs of classification and
claims of national security however
valid they may be to inform the American
public of deficiencies in their
intelligence services it is not of
course a task without risks but it is
the one that we have set out for
ourselves the disc the discussions which
will be held this morning our efforts to
identify publicly certain activities
undertaken by the National Security
Agency which are of questionable
propriety and dubious legality General
Allen director of the NSA will provide
for us today the background of these
activities and he will be questioned on
their origins and objectives by the
committee members like the CIA
the IRS the NSA too had a watch list
containing the names of US citizens this
list will be a particular interest to us
this morning though we will take up
another important subject as well the
dominant concern of this committee is
the intrusion by the federal government
into the inalienable rights guaranteed
Americans by the Constitution in
previous hearings we have seen how these
rights have been violated by the
intelligence services of the CIA the FBI
and the IRS at the press as the present
hearings will reveal the NSA has not
escaped the temptation to have its
operations expanded into provinces
protected by the law while the committee
has found the work of the NSA on the
whole to be of a high caliber and
properly restrained and has tremendous
respect for the professional caliber of
the people who worked there the topics
we shall explore today do illustrate
excesses and suggest areas where
legislative action is desirable that is
why we are here
this complex and sophisticated
electronic capability is the most
fragile weapon in our arsenal and
unfortunately I cannot elaborate on that
because that would not be proper public
inquiry on an essay i believe serves no
legitimate legislative purpose while
exposing this vital element of our
intelligence capability unnecessary
risks risk acknowledges and the
Chairman's own statement s res 21 does
authorize NSA inquiry and this has been
done very thoroughly in closed session
you thought this exclusion has usually
been applied and is applied now however
we will describe a particular activity
in the past when that exclusion was not
alive is conducted in such a manner as
to minimize the unwanted messages
nevertheless many unwanted
communications are potentially available
for selection subsequent processing
sorting and selecting for analysis is
conducted in accordance with strict
procedures to ensure immediate and
wherever possible automatic rejection of
inappropriate messages the analysis and
reporting is accomplished only for those
messages which meet specified conditions
and requirements for Foreign
Intelligence it is certainly believed by
NSA that our committee including some
between US citizens when one of the
communicants was at a foreign location
the origin of such an activity is
unclear during the early 1960s
requesting agencies had asked the
National Security Agency to look for
reflections and international
communications of certain US citizens
traveling to Cuba 1967 to 1973
requirements for watch lists were
developed in four basic areas
international drug trafficking
presidential protection acts of
terrorism
and possible foreign support or
influence on civil disturbances in the
60s there was presidential concern
voiced over the massive flow of drugs
into our country from outside the United
States early in President Nixon's
administration he instructed the CIA to
pursue with vigor intelligence efforts
to identify foreign sources of drugs and
the foreign organizations and methods
used to introduce illicit drugs into the
United States the BND d in 1970 the
bureau of narcotics and dangerous drugs
asked the national security agency to
provide communications intelligence
relevant to these foreign aspects and B
and ed provided watch lists with some us
names international drug trafficking
requirements were formally documented in
new sub requirements in August 1971 the
activity in 1973 the one instance in
which foreign messages were intercepted
for specific watchlist purposes was the
collection of some telephone calls
passed over international communications
facilities between the United States and
South America the collection was
conducted at a specific request of the
BND d to produce intelligence
information on the methods and locations
of foreign narcotics trafficking in
addition to our own intercept CIA was
asked by NSA to assist in this
collection NSA provided to CIA names of
individuals from the international
narcotics trafficking watch list and
this collection by CIA lasted for
approximately six months from late
nineteen seventy-two to early nineteen
seventy three when CIA stopped because
of concern that the activity exceeded
CIA statutory restrictions when the
watch list activity began the National
Security Agency raised by the various
watch lists that you have described i
might say for
the the benefit of everyone concerned
that it's the committee's intention to
call on the Attorney General in order
that the questions regarding the
possible illegality of these watch list
operations and also questions relating
to the constitutional guarantees under
the Fourth Amendment can be taken up
with the the proper official of the
government the Attorney General of the
United States we would we would hope to
have the attorney attorney general levy
here to discuss the legal and
constitutional implications of your
statement at a later date perhaps next
week so I would hope that on that score
members would not press you too far
since the proper witness i think is the
Attorney General yes I see one of which
is outside with respect to wholly
domestic communications is there any
statute that prohibits your interception
thereof or is it merely a matter of your
internal executive branch directives by
understanding mr. Schwartz is that the
at least the National Security Council
intelligence directive defines our
activities and foreign communications
and that we have adopted a definition
for born communications consistent with
the Communications Act of 1934 and
therefore I I think that is the right
but you believe you're consistent with
the statutes but there isn't any statute
that prohibits your interception of
domestic communication ugly what's
correct nothing further
just to the individuals organizations
involved in civil disturbances anti-war
movements demonstrations and things such
as that is a minaret was the term that
began in nineteen sixty-nine and as we
described somewhat formalized the
process by which these messages were
handled which had begun in prayer
apparently all 1957 now in the in the
initial communication on minaret is is
it true that one of the equally
important aspects of minaret was not to
disclose that NSA was doing this that
appears in the in the documentation
regarding yes and what was the reason
for disclosed for not disclosing to the
other intelligence agencies because this
information only went to other
intelligence agencies where there was a
reason for not disclosing to the other
intelligence agencies who with consumers
that NSA was not doing this the it's
hard for me to really answer because I'm
not exactly sure as to what was the
feeling of people at the time my
understanding is that the concern was
that the people at NSA felt it was
terribly important that the activity be
solely related to foreign intelligence
and that by delivering these kinds of
messages to an agency which also had a
law enforcement function there was a
danger that the material would end up
being used for a purpose which would not
would not be appropriate therefore for
that reason there were a set of
procedures adopted which made the
material be handled in a
distinctive and separate way to where it
went to only specified individuals only
hand-carried clearly marked for
background use only and also devoid of
the kinds of designators which are
placed on on the kind of intelligence
information which NSA produces for a
broader range of users right there being
some concern that this was a
questionable legal area and that
therefore dissemination of of who was
doing it and how they were doing it
might have might have also been
injurious to the agency but it is
possible I I think that of course the
concern was that if the material was was
the basic concern as I would imagine it
was in people's minds at that time was
that if the material were used for some
purpose associated with prosecuted or
evidentiary basis that the the sources
and methods which were used to obtain
that intelligence would then be
vulnerable to disclosure or demands by
course receipt so there was a very great
concern to ensure that this material was
was handled in such a way as to minimize
the possibility that it would be using
that fashion what if there is some
question in our mind as to whether the
actual watch list procedures that we
described here were the reason for for
selecting out the message that made that
revelation so and attempt to be
completely fair i would like to not say
that was a result of it did come from a
message there yes to intercept yes you
gave it another example the as a value
of this service a notification to the
FBI of a major foreign tourists act that
was planned in a large United States
city city in this country which action
was prevented because of information you
received yes sir this is sort of
information that you were looking for
and watching for yes sir now and all of
that period of time and all of those six
years then is it various
you had about sixteen hundred and fifty
American names out of about 200 million
Americans yes sir all right so now have
you made all that information available
now there's another project that has
been alluded to but has not been named
here today have you also testified to
the members of this committee or and are
to the staff all the information
relevant to that project just have you
been willing at all times to disclose
any and all information about the
National Security Agency to the members
of this committee in executive session
yes and are you still now really extend
are you now ready and willing to
disclose that or any other information
in closed session just in closed session
to this committee of United States
senators yes sir now you testified also
about the law would regard to this
disclosure of information bear with me
just a minute for the purposes of
defending this country and informing it
it also scares me in terms of its
possible abuse and that's why I'm
interested in knowing what limitations
exist in your opinion upon its use that
could be described as an abuse of the
legal rights of American citizens as I
understand your testimony you limit
yourself to the interception of
communications between either to or from
a foreign terminal 21 in the United
States you do not intercept messages to
and from persons within the United
States that's correct but
I also understand that this is a matter
of policy and not of law that the basis
for this limitation is a judgment on the
part of our government that that ought
to be as far as you go there is not in
your judgment or in the judgment of the
agency a restriction that would limit
you precisely to those policy guidelines
that you now have well I believe that's
correct sir as far as a precise
restriction is concerned yet there is no
misunderstanding with regard to the
executive directors that exist that the
restriction is to foreign intelligence
purposes and a foreign community matter
watch list another wide sweep to
determine whether some of the domestic
dissent is really foreign-based whether
that pressure could be resisted on the
basis of the law or not it's very hard
for me of course to project into a
future unknown situation and there are
certainly risks that seem to have
occurred in the past I can certainly
assure you that that at the present time
under any combinations of the present
players as I understand the rules and
the players themselves there is no
possibility I will they would appear to
be unlawful to they have now been
terminated and thus do not represent
ongoing activities three they can be
discussed without revealing the NSA's
sensitive techniques and for legislation
is needed to prevent their repetition
what has occurred yesterday could occur
tomorrow if we leave it all to executive
decision
now as I have said as to one of these
the watch list the administration agreed
to be classified the documents and
authorized General Allen to testify as
he has as for the other the executive
branch has consistently opposed public
hearings or any other form of public
disclosure yesterday the committee in
the manner I described in response to
Senator Goldwater agreed that we
nevertheless would disclose facts
concerning the second program to the
American public I believe that the
public is entitled to an explanation of
why that decision was made yesterday in
face of the administration strongly
stated opposition I do not suggest that
the administration has acted in any way
other than in good faith to exercise its
responsibilities as it perceives them
however Congress has a right and duty to
exercise some judgment on its own it
must do so fairly properly and would do
regard to the views of the executive but
it cannot simply abdicate to the
executive may make both the government
and private companies more careful to
weigh the legality of programs that may
be suggested in the future so in
balancing the arguments for and against
disclosure which we have done most
carefully we have consulted extensively
with the executive branch several times
we have delayed our action to make
certain that we had heard all of the
executive branch's arguments we have
engaged in extensive interrogations of
General Allen and director Colby and the
Secretary of Defense mr. Schlesinger and
finally from the Attorney General and
representatives of the President so we
believe we have listened fully to the
arguments that they wish to present now
if the committee remains firm in its
decision the second matter is what form
of disclosure would be most appropriate
since witnesses have not been made
available by the executive branch it
seems to me that the most appropriate
form of disclosure would take them would
be that of a statement issued on the
authority of the committee itself
carefully drawn to present the key facts
unemotionally and without fanfare as to
the accuracy of this of the statement it
would be carefully checked with the
agency itself so that there would be no
factual distortions in the presentation
the statement I might emphasize would be
based on testimony received by the
committee in executive session it would
not quote in whole or in part from the
text of any classified document
presented by the executive branch to the
committee because the testimony given an
executive session before this committee
was classified by the committee itself
pursuant to the committee's rules the
committee has every right to release
such facts based upon such testimony
indeed it has the right to release the
testimony itself should it so decide
so the decision taken yesterday to
release this information was based
primarily on the belief that programs of
such a dubious legality should be
disclosed because absent real national
security factors which are not present
in this case classification should not
be used to hide or cover wrongdoing from
the meeting yesterday in which without
objection it was decided that this
matter would be spread of the public
record today had I been there I would
have objected and perhaps this debate
could have ensued at that point my
justification for not being there is
that I am the ranking minority member of
the Banking Committee which was at that
moment considering the plight of New
York City and so I was buried in the
bowels of the fiscal mismanagement of
that great city and I am sorry that I
was not there I really see no
legislative basis for this public
disclosure I don't think that it's
necessary from the standpoint of our
legislative mandate now it appears that
committee rules 75 is the only point
having any married at all and in my view
it must feel this rule provides for
procedures ensuring the protection of
classified materials this rule does not
authorized the unilateral release of
classified information a proper reading
would be that the rule goes to
disclosure of information not the
classification a majority vote is
necessary of prior to committee release
of any material of a classified nature
but it's spurious to state that a simple
majority vote is enough to declassify
would argue with them but the case at
hand has to do with unlawful conduct
that relates to certain domestic
companies in this
trend it said it's not a matter of such
gravity that it would even impair the
national security of the United States
in ways that your examples that is the
matter to be debating exec yes very well
we will delete it and their executives
had a good deal i but the senators who
wish to be heard I want to recognize
first senator Morgan wants to be
recognized first let me recognize
senator Baker thank you very much now
recognize any Morgan I won't take very
long I simply want to say that as a
matter of as a matter of legal argument
that the rules of this committee can be
no broader nor create any authority and
jurisdiction beyond the rules of the
Senate from which we derive our
Authority and it seems to me that the
rules of the Senate at least arguably
say that a class
[Music]
Oh
you